usb portal documentation (#541)
flatpak/flatpak-docs: docs/sandbox-permissions.rst

While not ideal, ``--device=all`` can be used to access devices like
webcams, CD/DVD drives etc.

USB portal
``````````

> New in 1.5.11.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since 1.5.11.
```

Sandboxed access to individual USB devices can be controlled
controlled by portals. Flatpak allow specifying enumerable USB devices
to allow access.

Like ``--device=usb``, this is just about accessing the raw USB
devices, that need libusb. By using the portal, you can restrict which
device can be requested (enumerable) and then request an explicit
permission to access. For example, if you run a scanner driver, there
is no reason USB security devices be accessible.

> A list of valid use cases include scanners (handled, for example by

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A list of valid use cases includes scanners (handled, for example by
```

SANE), photo cameras (handled by libgphoto2), flashing devices, etc.

While this is portal dependent and ``xdg-desktop-portal`` is currently
the only portal implementation, the overall permission flow is as
follow:

- The package specify which devices it wishes to enumerate.
- The application requests the portal to enumerate the available USB
  devices based on that list. If the list is empty it will enumerate
  all USB devices.
- When the application wants to access the device, it will request,
  via the portal, the device it wants to access.
- The portal then request permission to the user if not already
  granted.
- If the permission was granted, a file descriptor for the device is
  passed back to the application.

The application is able to open the devices it is supposed to use
while the others would be hidden.

Specifying the enumerable devices
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

> You can specify devices on the flatpak command line, and by extension

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can specify devices on the ``flatpak`` command line and by extension
```

in the finish arguments for Flatpak Builder. Enumerable devices are
specified with a query passed with ``--usb=`` while hidden devices are
specified with a query passed with ``--nousb=``. The hidden list is
always applied on top of the enumerable list, like an exception

> list. The goal is to be able to specify a broad range and then exclude

Author: something like that.

the few devices that shall not be enumerated.

Queries are made out of rules. These rules are composable with ``+``.

The rule ``all`` enumerates every USB device. There is no further rule
allowed in the query.

The ``vnd`` and ``dev`` rules specify a USB vendor and a USB device ID
respectively. A vendor can be specified alone, but a device rule

> always comes with a vendor rule as a device id is only unique within a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
always comes with a vendor rule as a device ID is only unique within a
```

vendor. Vendor and device ID are specified with 4 digit hex
numbers. For more information about the USB IDs, you can refer to the
`Linux USB ID repository <http://www.linux-usb.org/usb-ids.html>`_

``cls`` specifies the device USB class and subclass. Both class and

> subclass are two digits hex numbers separated by a colon ``:``. You

Reviewer: ```suggestion
subclass are two digit hex numbers separated by a colon ``:``. You
```

can use ``*`` to specify any subclass within the class.

Some examples of the syntax:

- ``vnd:1234``: Devices from vendor ``1234``
- ``vnd:1234+dev:3456``: Only device 3456 from vendor ``1234``.
- ``vnd:1234+cls:06:*``: All the PTP devices from vendor ``1234``.
- ``cls:06:*``: All the PTP devices.

Permission is merely granted to enumerate devices, to open them,
permission must be requested from the portal. It is not possible to
open a device that is not enumerable.

.. note::

   The ``--device=usb`` permission is broader than what the USB portal
   is supposed to provide and allows unfettered access to any USB
   device on the bus.

In some situations you may need to specify a very long list of devices.

Device lists can be passed in one single argument, or through a file.

When using ``--usb-list``, the queries are separated by a semi-colon
``;``, with queries for hidden devices (i.e. those that would be
passed with ``--nousb``) prefixed with ``!``.

When using ``--usb-list-file`` the file whose filename is passed
contains USB queries, one per line. Like with ``--usb-list`` queries

> for hidden devices are prefixed with ``!``. Empty lines are ignored,
> so are lines starting with a ``#`` that can be used to comment. Note
> that comments are discarded. The file is no longer needed afterwards

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for hidden devices are prefixed with ``!``. Empty lines and lines starting with a
``#`` are ignored. The file is no longer needed afterwards
```
